
--- Page 1 ---
Cells

> 1.1 Plant cells

Plants and animals are living organisms. They are made of units
called cells.
With a partner, think about answers to these questions:
* How big do you think a cell is?
How can we see cells?
Can you describe what a cell looks like?
= > Be ready to share your ideas with the class.
"= i, “4 NS . ——

\)

gettyimages 1)»
Claudio Divizia /EVeEm yf

--- Page 2 ---
1.1 Plant cells

Cells

Tf you study a plant by observing part of it
through a microscope, you will see that it
is made up of a very large number of tiny
‘boxes’. These are called cells. All living
organisms are made of cells.

Cells are so small that you cannot see them
with your eyes alone. The photograph of the
plant cells was taken through a microscope.

* a e ‘one cell
The microscope magnifies the view of the
cells, so that they look much bigger than they
really are. Part of a leaf seen through a microscope
Parts of a plant cell
The diagram shows a plant cell from a leaf.
cell wall sap vacuole
Every plant cell has a cell wall. The cell wall is This is a large, fluid-filled space inside
strong and stiff. It holds the plant cell in a plant cell. The liquid inside it is. a
shape. Plant cell walls are made of a substance solution of sugars and other substances
called cellulose. dissolved in water. The solution is,

called cell sap.

cell membrane

All cells have a cell membrane. The cell

membrane is very thin and flexible. It is like chloroplast

the thin skin of a soap bubble. It lies along the Plant cells that are in the sunlight often

inner edge of the cell wall. The cell membrane contain chloroplasts. This is where

controls what goes in and out of the cell. plants make their food. Chloroplasts
look green because they contain a
green substance called chlorophiylt.

cytoplasm
All cells have cytoplasm. Cytoplasm is like clear
jelly. Chemical reactions happen inside the

1. Thi ell alive.
cytoplasm. These reactions keep the cell alive.

All plant cells have mitochondria
(singular; mitochondrion). Inside
mitochondria, energy is released
from food.

nucleus
Most cells have a nucleus. The nucleus controls
the activities of the cell.

Diagram of a leaf cell

Questions

1. Look at the photograph of the plant cells on this page.
What do you think the little green circles inside the cells are?
Why are they green? What happens inside them?

2 Describe four differences between a cell wall and a cell membrane.

=
o
re)
=
©

ngan


--- Page 3 ---
Think like a scientist

Making a model of a plant cell

In this task, you will make a model to represent a plant cell. You will then think about the
strengths and limitations (weaknesses) of your model.

Here is a list of materials and objects you could use to make your model.
transparent boxes
cardboard boxes
small and large plastic bags filled with water
green peas, green beads or green grapes
transparent food wrap
empty plastic bags
purple grapes
coloured modelling material

In a group of three or four, discuss how you can use some of these materials and objects
to make a model of a plant cell. Then make your model.

Be ready to explain your model to others.

Questions
1 Compare your model cell with the models made by other groups.

Are there are any features of your model that are better than those in the other
groups’ models?

Are there any features of other groups’ models that are better than yours?

2 Discuss how well your model cell represents a real plant cell.


--- Page 4 ---
1.1 Plant cells

Microscopes

Scientists who study living organisms
often use microscopes to help them
to see very small things.

coarse focussing knob
fine focussing knob

high-power objective lens
medium-power objective lens
— low power-objective lens
microscope stage

The diagram shows a microscope.
Look at a real microscope and find
all of these parts on it.

mirror

A microscope

Think like a scientist

Looking at plant cells through a microscope
This task gives you practice in using scientific equipment and doing practical work safely.

Collect a small piece of onion. Cut out a piece about 1cm square.

Use a dropper pipette to put a small drop of water into the middle of a clean
microscope slide.

Very carefully, peel the thin layer from the inside of your piece of onion.

Gently push the layer into the drop of water on the slide. Spread it out as flat as you
can.

Collect a very thin piece of glass called a cover
slip. (Take care - cover slips break very easily!)
Gently lower the cover slip over your piece of
onion on the slide. Try not to get air bubbles
under the cover slip.

Turn the objective lenses on the microscope
until the smallest one is over the hole in
the stage.

Put the slide onto the stage of the microscope,
with the piece of onion over the hole.


--- Page 5 ---
Continued

8 Look down the eyepiece. Slowly turn the focussing knob to move the lens away from
the slide. Stop when the piece of onion comes into focus.

9 Make a drawing of some of the cells you can see.

Questions

1 Suggest why the cells from the onion do not look green.

2 Describe any difficulties you had with this activity. How did you solve them?

Self-assessment
Think about how you did this task.
For each of these statements, rate yourself.

© © ©

if you think you did if you did it if you didn't do it all,
it very well, with quite well, or needed or needed a lot
no help some help of help

| cut a piece of the inside layer of onion that was about 1 cm square.
| was able to spread the piece of onion flat in the drop of water.

| put the cover slip over the onion without getting any air bubbles.

| saw onion cells down the microscope.

| focussed the microscope so that | could see the cells really clearly.

o
Vv

--- Page 6 ---
1.2 Animal cells

>» 1.2 Animal cells

© find out how animal cells differ from plant cells
* use a microscope to look at some animal cells.

Getting started Key words

There are five parts of a plant cell with names beginning with the
letter c.

Make a list of these five parts. Think about how you can
remember what each of the words means.

Be ready to share your ideas.


--- Page 7 ---
Parts of an animal cell

All animals are made of cells.
You are an animal, and your
body is made of cells. No one
knows exactly how many cells
there are in a person. One
estimate is about 100 trillion.
That is 100000000 000000 cells.

Animal cells are similar to plant
cells in several ways. They have
a cell membrane, cytoplasm and
a nucleus.

cell membrane

cytoplasm

mitochondrion

nucleus

An animal cell

Think like a scientist

Looking at animal cells through a microscope
This task gives you more practice in using scientific equipment safely.

You will need:

a microscope, a microscope slide, a cover slip, a cotton bud,
some methylene blue, a dropper pipette

Very gently rub the cotton bud along
the inside of your cheek. This will collect
some loose cells.

Rub the cotton bud on the surface of a
clean microscope slide. You will not be

Tech-Set:- AW_U1

able to see the cells yet, because they are black
so small. ec

Use a dropper pipette to add a drop of
methylene blue to the cells. Methylene blue is a dye that will
stain the cells blue, making them easier to see.

Carefully lower a cover slip over the drop of blue stain.
Put the smallest objective lens over the stage.
Put the slide onto the stage, with the part you want to look at over the hole in the stage.

Looking from the side, turn the focussing knob until the lens is close to the slide.


--- Page 8 ---
1.2 Animal cells

Continued

Look down the eyepiece. Slowly turn the focussing knob to move the lens upwards.
Stop when you can see the cells.

9 Turn the lenses until a larger one is over the stage. Look down the eyepiece.
You should be able to see a more magnified view of the cells.

10 Make a drawing of one or two of the cells you can see. Label your drawing.

Questions
1 The photographs show some cells, seen through a microscope.

For each photograph, decide whether the cells are plant cells or
animal cells. Explain your decision.

2 Think about the model of a plant cell that you made.

What would you change to make it into a model of an animal cell?

Building up pictures of plant and animal cells

You will need:

* fifteen cut-out oval pieces of card or paper, each about 1 cm long, five coloured
red and ten coloured green

* one cut-out circular piece of grey card or paper, about 1 cm in diameter
* long pieces of string or wool

* along piece of wide tape

* glue or double-sided sticky tape

a very large sheet of paper

anol

sachtienga

--- Page 9 ---
In a group of two or three, use the materials to build a picture of a plant cell. It is up to
your group to decide exactly how to use the materials to make your picture. You may
not want to use all of the materials.

Ask your teacher, or other people in your class, to check that you have put all the right
pieces in the right places.

Now remove some of the pieces, to change your picture into an animal cell.

sachtienganhhanoi.com

--- Page 10 ---
> 1.3 Specialised cells

Getting started

With a partner, think of a suitable way to complete each
sentence.

* Cell membranes ...

* Cell walls ...

¢ Anucleus...

* Chloroplasts ...

Be ready to share your ideas with the rest of the class.

1.3 Specialised cells

--- Page 11 ---
Some specialised animal cells

Not all of the cells in your body are the same. There are many different
kinds of cell in your body. Each kind of cell has a particular function.
The function of a cell is the job that it does, or the role that it plays.

Each cell is specialised to carry out its function, This means that it
has a structure that helps it to do its function really well. The cell is
adapted to carry out its function.

The diagrams show three kinds of specialised cell in the human body.

Red blood cells are smaller than most other cells in the body.
This allows them to get through tiny blood capillaries, so they
can deliver oxygen to every part of the body. cytoplasm

cell membrane

The cytoplasm contains a red pigment (colour) called haemoglobin.

This carries oxygen around the body.
Red blood cells

The cell has no nucleus. This leaves more space for haemoglobin.

Neurones carry electrical signals from one part of the nucleus cytoplasm
body to another. They help all the different parts of

the body to communicate with each other. For example,
they can carry signals from the brain to muscles, to
make the muscles move.

cell membrane

The axon is a very long strand of cytoplasm.
Electrical signals can travel along this very quickly.

dendrite axon

Dendrites are short strands of cytoplasm that collect Neurones
electrical signals from other nearby nerve cells.

Ciliated cells have tiny threads along one edge, cilia
like microscopic hairs. These are called cilia. The cilia can move.

Z eee : — HI membr
One place in the body that contains ciliated cells is the lining of the pe

tubes leading from your mouth to your lungs. nucleus
Other cells in this lining make a sticky substance called mucus.

When you breathe in, the mucus traps dust and bacteria in cytoplasm
the air, to stop them going into your lungs. The cilia sweep

the mucus up to the back of your mouth and you swallow it. Ciliated cella

Questions

1 List two things that red blood cells, neurones and ciliated cells
have in common.

2 How can you tell that all of these three cells are animal cells,
not plant cells?


--- Page 12 ---
Structure and function in animal cells
Work with a partner.

1.3 Specialised cells

Here is the start of a table that you can use to summarise how each kind of specialised

animal cell is adapted to carry out its function.

Copy the start of the table onto a piece of paper. Then complete the entries for the red

blood cell.

You could include a small drawing of a red blood cell underneath its name in the first column.

Next, add entries for a neurone and a ciliated cell. Remember to give your table a title.

When you are ready, copy your completed table onto a large sheet of paper, ready to

be displayed.

has haemoglobin
in its cytoplasm

How this helps the

cell to carry out
its function

haemoglobin
Carries Oxygen

Some specialised plant cells
Plants also contain specialised cells. Here are two examples.
Root hair cells are found on the outside of plant roots.

Their function is to absorb (soak up) water from the soil.

Each cell has a long, thin extension that allows water to move easily

from the soil into the cell.

sachtienganhhanoi.com

--- Page 13 ---
cell wall nucleus

cell membrane

cytoplasm

large vacuole
with cell sap

A root hair cell

Palisade cells are found in the leaves of plants. Their function is to
make food by photosynthesis.

They have a lot of chloroplasts containing chlorophyll.

The chlorophyll absorbs energy from sunlight, which is used to help
the plant make food.

cell wall

cell membrane
mitochondrion
cytoplasm

chloroplast

nucleus

A palisade cell

Questions
3 Suggest why root hair cells do not contain chloroplasts.

4 Water moves through several parts of the root hair cell, as it goes
from the soil into the sap vacuole, List these parts, in order.

©
7)

--- Page 14 ---
1.3 Specialised cells

Structure and function in plant cells

Make a table to summarise how the structures of the two kinds of specialised plant cell are
related to their functions.

Peer assessment
Exchange your table with a partner.
For each of these statements, rate your partner's work.

© © ©

if you think they if they did it quite well, but it _ if they didn't do it all, or it
did it very well could be improved needs a lot of improvement.

They made a clear table with ruled lines. C
They gave the columns in the table headings to make clear what each one shows.
They headed the rows in the table with the names of the two kinds of plant cell.
They wrote short, very clear descriptions of how the cell is specialised.

The table is very clear and you can understand it easily.

sachtienganhhanoi.com

--- Page 15 ---
1 Cells

>» 1.4 Cells, tissues and organs

this topic you will: i
¢ find out about tissues, organs and organ systems in living
organisms

* recognise and name human organs that are part of different
organ systems.
Getting started

Draw an outline of a human body.

Sketch and label each of these organs on the outline.

brain heart stomach intestine lungs


--- Page 16 ---
1.4 Cells, tissues and organs

Tissues

Living things, including animals and plants, are called organisms. There
are many different kinds of cell in an animal or a plant. Most of them
are specialised to carry out a particular activity. Usually, many cells of
the same kind are grouped together.

A group of similar cells, which all work together to carry out a
particular function, is called a tissue.

The diagrams show a tissue from a plant, and a tissue from an animal.

This is a diagram of a tissue from inside an onion. It is called an onion
epidermis. This tissue covers the surface of the layers inside the onion.

Onion epithelium

This is a diagram of ciliated epithelium — the tissue that lines the tubes
leading down to our lungs. The cilia all wave together, like grass in the wind.

cilia
nucleus

Ciliated epithelium

Questions

1 What is the function of the ciliated epithelium tissue?
(Think about the function of a ciliated cell.)

2 The word ‘tissue’ has an everyday meaning and a different scientific
meaning. Write two sentences, one using the word ‘tissue’ with
its everyday meaning, and one using the word ‘tissue’ with its
scientific meaning.


--- Page 17 ---
Organs and organ systems

The bodies of plants and
animals contain many different
parts, called organs. For
example, your organs include
your brain, heart and muscles.
Plants’ organs include leaves,
roots and flowers.

upper epidermis

palisade layer

Each organ is made up of
several different kinds of tissue,
working together. For example,
your brain contains neurones,
and also several other kinds of
cell. A plant root contains root
hair cells, and also several other This is part of a leaf, cut open. A leaf is a plant organ, and contains several
kinds of cell. different kinds of tissue.

spongy layer

lower epidermis

Organs also work together.
A set of organs that all
work together to carry out the same function is called an organ system.

Activity 1.4.1

Organs and systems in humans

Your task is to find out the names and functions of the different organs that are part of
one system in the human body.

Choose from: digestive system, circulatory system, respiratory system or skeletal system:

When you have found this information, decide how to display it. Perhaps you could
make a presentation, or a large drawing with labels and descriptions.

Question

3 Copy and complete each sentence, using words from the list.
organism tissue organ organ system

A group of similar cells is called a

An is a structure made of many different tissues.
An________is a group of organs that carry out a particular function.
An____isa living thing. It may contain many different

organ systems, organs and tissues.

eT
18 >

--- Page 18 ---
1.4 Cells, tissues and organs

Summary checklist

o Ie
|

Project: Cells discovery timeline

This project is about how scientific knowledge
gradually develops over time. You are going to
work in a group to do research, and then use
your findings to help to make a timeline.

Science never stays still. When one scientist makes a
new discovery, this suggests new questions that other
scientists can investigate.

You are going to produce a timeline. The timeline will
show how scientists gradually discovered that all living
things are made of cells.

The list below shows some of the important steps that occurred.

In your group, choose one of these steps to investigate. Make
sure that you do not choose the same step as another group.

Help your group to find out more about this step. Then help This is the type of microscope
to produce an illustrated account of what happened. that Robert Hooke used.

Try to include an explanation of how the work of earlier
scientists helped this step to take place.

1625 Galileo Galilei builds the first microscope.

1665 Robert Hooke looks at cork (from tree bark) through a microscope, and describes
little compartments that he calls cells.

1670 Anton van Leeuwenhoek improves the microscope and is able to see living cells in
a drop of pond water.

1833 Robert Brown discovers the nucleus in plant cells

1838 Matthias Schleiden proposes that all plant tissues are made of cells. Theodor
Schwann proposes that is also true of animal cells.

1845 Carl Heinrich Braun proposes that cells are the basic unit of all life.

1855 Rudolf Virchow says that all cells only arise from other cells.

--- Page 19 ---
Check your Progress
1.1 Different cells have different functions.
Name the cell that carries out each function.
Choose from the list.
red blood cell root hair cell Palisade cell
a Moves mucus up through the airways.
b Absorbs water from the soil.

c¢ Makes food by photosynthesis.

1.2 The diagram shows an animal cell.

Name the parts labelled A, B, C and D.

neurone ciliated cell
(1]
[1]
{1}

[4]

Describe two ways you can tell that this is an animal cell and nota plant cell. [2]

3 The diagram shows a plant cell.


--- Page 20 ---
For each letter, A-E, write the name of the cell part and its function.
Choose from these lists: [5]

Names:

mitochondrion cell membrane nucleus cell wall chloroplast

Functions:
holds the cell in shape
controls what goes in and out of the cell
where photosynthesis takes place
where energy is released from nutrients

controls the activities of the cell

1.4 The diagram shows a specialised cell from the human body.

ee ee =

What is the name of this cell?

What is the function of this cell?

Describe how the cell is adapted to carry out its function.

Name the system in the human body that this cell is part of.
These sentences are about the way that cells are grouped together in
complex organisms.
Copy and complete each sentence. Choose from the list.

cell tissue organ organ system

In a complex organism, such as a human or a plant, similar cells are grouped

together to form a

The stomach is an example of an

The heart and blood vessels are all part of the same

